- Syria, including Jerusalem, was brought under the jurisdiction of Rome by the work of Pompey, a general and statemen of Rome (See: DAR 233.4-234.3^[**VERSE 16. But he that cometh against him shall do according to his own will, and none shall stand before him: and he shall stand in the glorious land, which by his hand shall be consumed.** DAR 233.4
Although Egypt could not stand before Antiochus, the king of the north, Antiochus could not stand before the Romans, who now came against him. No kingdoms were longer able to resist this rising power. Syria was conquered, and added to the Roman empire, when Pompey, B. C. 65, deprived Antiochus Asiaticus of his possessions, and reduced Syria to a Roman province. DAR 233.5
The same power was also to stand in the Holy Land, and consume it. Rome became connected 
with the people of God, the Jews, by alliance, B. C. 161, from which date it holds a prominent 
place in the prophetic calendar. It did not, however, acquire jurisdiction over Judea by 
actual conquest till B. C. 63; and then in the following manner. DAR 234.1
On Pompey’s return from his expedition against Mithridates, king of Pontus, two competitors, 
Hyrcanus and Aristobulus, were struggling for the crown of Judea. Their cause came 
before Pompey, who soon perceived the injustice of the claims of Aristobulus, but 
wished to defer decision in the matter till after his long-desired expedition into Arabia, 
promising then to return, and settle their affairs as should seem just and proper. 
Aristobulus, fathoming Pompey’s real sentiments, hastened back to Judea, armed his subjects, 
and prepared for a vigorous defense, determined, at all hazards, to keep the crown, which he 
foresaw would be adjudicated to another. Pompey closely followed the fugitive. As he 
approached Jerusalem, Aristobulus, beginning to repent of his course, came out to meet 
him, and endeavored to accommodate matters by promising entire submission, and large 
sums of money. Pompey, accepting this offer, sent Gabinius, at the head of a detachment 
of soldiers, to receive the money. But when that lieutenant-general arrived at Jerusalem, 
he found the gates shut against him, and was told from the top of the walls that the city 
would not stand to the agreement. DAR 234.2
Pompey, not to be deceived in this way with impunity, put Aristobulus, whom he had retained 
with him, in irons, and immediately marched against Jerusalem with his whole army. The 
partisans of Aristobulus were for defending the place; those of Hyrcanus, for opening the 
gates. The latter being in the majority, and prevailing, Pompey was given free entrance 
into the city. Whereupon the adherents of Aristobulus retired to the mountain of the temple, 
as fully determined to defend that place as Pompey was to reduce it. At the end of three 
months a breach was made in the wall sufficient for an assault, and the place was carried at the 
point of the sword. In the terrible slaughter that ensued, twelve thousand persons were slain. It 
was an affecting sight, observes the historian, to see the priests, engaged at the time in divine 
service, with calm hand and steady purpose pursue their accustomed work, apparently 
unconscious of the wild tumult, though all around them their friends were given to the slaughter, 
and though often their own blood mingled with that of their sacrifices. DAR 234.3
]and TBI 46.2^[After that the prophet saw it extending itself toward the east, the south, and the pleasant 
land. This was fulfilled when it made Syria and Palestine Roman provinces in B.C.65 and 
63, and Egypt, as already stated, B.C.30. . TBI 46.2]).
- fulfillment of:
	- [[Dan 11#41]]