Many have not heard of the date 10/22/1844, but they might have heard the term "The Great Disappointment." Without enough of the history surrounding this time, one could conclude that the disappointment was proof that those who were disappointed were not being lead by the truth. In this article, what the disappointment was about, what caused it, whether those who were disappointed were following the truth, what actually happened on this date, as well as some things one can take away from such an experience in history.

### What was the disappointment?
In writing about the what and why of the disappointment, it is necessary to mention William Miller. William Miller was a farmer, once a deist, who came to study the Bible, and gained understanding of the ending of different time prophecies (mentioned in the books of Daniel and Revelation). Upon tracing the ending of various time prophecies (such as the 2520 and 2300), Miller first came to the date [[04-19-1843]] for the end of all such prophecies. To understand how he arrived at this date, lets begin by visiting the 2300 day prophecy. 

[Dan 8:13](verseid:27.8.13)  Then I heard one saint speaking, and another saint said unto that certain _saint_ which spake, How long _shall be_ the vision _concerning_ the daily _sacrifice,_ and the transgression of desolation, to give both the sanctuary and the host to be trodden under foot?

[Dan 8:14](verseid:27.8.14)  And he said unto me, Unto two thousand and three hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be cleansed.

To give some brief context for the question in verse 13, in chapter 8, Daniel is given a vision of future events concerning the rise and fall of kingdoms - in connection with the captivity of God's people. 

Here





### Did the disappointment prove the advent experience a lie?

### What actually happened on 10/22/1844?
- 10d7m = 10/22/1844
- no sanctuary on earth during the end of the 2300
	- One of the ways to know that
- sanctuary cleansed = day of atonement 
- holiest of all = most holy 
- The sanctuary on earth was made after the pattern of the one in Heaven ([[Mark 14#58]], [[Heb 8]] [[Heb 9]]). The pattern seen in the tabernacle given to Moses ([[Exod 25]]-30) is: the court ([[Exod 40#6]]-8), holy place ([[Heb 9#2]]) - (or "the tabernacle of the congregation") , and then the most holy place ([[Heb 9#3]]-5). They could only be entered upon in this order and exited in reverse order (https://i.pinimg.com/originals/1d/36/39/1d3639499b542a83da512521a1b4a559.jpg). In the true, heavenly sanctuary, of which the earthly instances illustrated, the earth is the court. To prove this, consider the symbolism of the earthly sanctuary: In the earthly sanctuary (which is an illustration of the heavenly), all animal sacrifices took place. Christ is the subject to which those sacrificial animals pointed ([[John 1#29]], [[Rev 13#8]]+[[Heb 9#26]], [[Heb 9#12]]). Christ came to the earth and was slain on the earth, just as the lamb was slain in the courtyard. When Christ resurrected, He signified that His work wasn't done concerning His people ([[John 14#2]]-3). When Christ's work was done on earth, He ascended to Heaven to continue His work there ([[Acts 1#9]]), but before He left them, He promised that, in connection with His work in Heaven, His disciples would receive power from the Holy Spirit ([[Acts 1#8]]). When the Holy Spirit does come upon them, there is a manifestation of flames above the heads of the disciples ([[Acts 2#3]]). This empowerment of the Holy Spirit made Christ's followers even greater channels of light. Through them, the world was, and is, to be gathered to Christ. In one of John's vision of Heaven, we see that there are 7 candlesticks (the true version of the candlesticks illustrated in the earthly model of the Holy Place) - ([[Rev 1#12]]-13). These candlesticks are said to be the 7 churches, mentioned in various places of the book of Revelation ([[Rev 1#20]]). Notice, the churches are the candlesticks themselves. In the Mosaic Holy Place, we see that the candlesticks were to be lit with fire. So what is the fire? It is the Angels that God uses to communicate to each church ([[Ps 9#4]], [[Heb 1#7]]). So, the angels are spirits that carry God's light and power to His people ([[Rev 1#1]]), who make up the candlesticks, and they are described to be like fire. The fire in the earthly Holy Place was the source of light. Remembering Christ's commission to His disciples ([[Matt 16#15]]-20, [[Luke 24#49]]), and knowing that God's people are represented as making up the candlesticks of [[Rev 1#12]]-13, we can conclude that, when God's people are lighting the world, it is because they are receiving the ministry of heavenly angels.. So on the day of Pentecost, where we find the disciples first receiving the power of the Holy Spirit (which was promised in connection to Christ's work in Heaven), we see there flames above their heads! If they are a part of those that make up the candlesticks, the true sanctuary is in Heaven, and the power and manifestation of fire seen that day corresponded to Christ's work in Heaven, then, seeing the symbol symbol of the candlestick (lit with fire), we can conclude that Christ was then ministering in the Holy Place - the very next place after the court (which we have already seen is the earth). Yet another way to see Christ work in the Holy place during that time is Christ's emphasis on prayer in connection with the Holy Spirit and the great use of prayer after Christ ascended and His followers took the baton ([[John 14#12]]-14). Remember, in the sanctuary system, prayer is seen in connection with the altar of incense (which is in the Holy Place). 





- The altar in the next compartment (the holy place) is the altar of incense: where prayers where to be offered up to God.   

- the investigative judgment, intercession, and blotting out of sins must happen before He comes back to get us, otherwise, no one would be able to go with Him to Heaven: seeing no one's sins would be blotted out
- The close of probation only happens after the sins are blotted out and Micheal (Christ) stands up to leave the Most Holy. This work brings the seal upon God's people and Satan's people. This sealing work happens before Christ comes back, but takes place during the working (and finishing of the work) in the Most Holy place, not the Holy Place. 
- In the End, Satan must be cast out as the scapegoat was cast out in the typical service. The work of laying the sins on the scapegoat (preparatory to taking the scapegoat away) happens in the Most Holy place.

### Some Take-aways

### Conclusion 


[Now when, according to the Scriptures, should the cleansing of the heavenly sanctuary begin? In [Daniel 8:14](1965.44838), from a certain time, it is said, “Unto two thousand and three hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be cleansed.” This also being prophetic time each day stands for a year, and is, therefore, two thousand and three hundred years. From what time? “From the going forth of the commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem.” [Daniel 9:25](1965.44915). Seventy weeks—four hundred and ninety years—were cut off from the two thousand three hundred, and appropriated to Daniel’s people, the Jews, and the beginning of the four hundred and ninety years is the beginning of the two thousand and three hundred. This beginning, as quoted above, was at the going forth of the commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem, which was in the year 457 B.C. [Ezra 7](1965.24776). Although Ezra, with the decree, started from Babylon in the first month, it was not till the fifth month that he reached Jerusalem; and as the decree was to the treasurers “beyond the river” Euphrates and in Palestine, it was of no force till he reached that country, so about half the year was gone before the decree could be said to go forth to restore and to build the city, which would make it about the middle of the year 457, or really 456½ years before Christ. Two thousand and three hundred years from 456½ B.C. brings us to 2300-456½=1843½ after Christ. Eighteen hundred and forty three and a half years after Christ carries us into the year 1844 A.D. Then it was, the angel said to Daniel, that the time of the cleansing of the sanctuary should be: “Unto two thousand and three hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be cleansed.” SITI July 20, 1888, p. 441.18
THAT this cannot be applied to the earthly sanctuary is made certain by the statement in [Daniel 9:25](1965.44915), that after the cutting off of the Messiah, the people of the prince that should come (the Romans) “should destroy _the city_ and _the sanctuary_,” and Christ said that when it should be destroyed, Jerusalem should be trodden under foot of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. [Luke 21:24](1965.52739). As that city and that sanctuary were to be destroyed, and were destroyed but a few years after the expiration of the four hundred and ninety years, it is impossible that that should be the sanctuary that was to be cleansed at the expiration of the two thousand and three hundred years. Consequently the sanctuary that was to be cleansed at the end of the two thousand and three hundred years was the heavenly sanctuary, because it is the only one that was then in existence. Therefore it is certain that the cleansing of the heavenly sanctuary in A.D. 1844. (For an extended and thorough treatment of the subject of the sanctuary and connected dates, see “The Sanctuary and Its Cleansing,” for sale at this office.) SITI July 20, 1888, p. 441.19
THE cleansing of the sanctuary, the work of the atonement under the Levitical law, was a work of judgment. For said the Scripture, “Whatsoever soul it be that shall not be afflicted in that same day, he shall be cut off from among his people.” [Leviticus 23:29](1965.6981). Whoever did not make confession of sin that day could have no part in the atonement that was made that day; and when the sanctuary had been cleansed, and atonement made, he was to be cut off without mercy, he had no other chance, his probation was gone. So, likewise, in the cleansing of the heavenly sanctuary, in the atonement made once for all, whosoever shall not confess his sins, and be partaker of the intercession of Christ, can have no part in the atonement of Christ, and when that sanctuary shall have been cleansed, and that atonement made, he will be cut off without mercy, he will have no other opportunity, his probation will be ended. Of such it will be said, “He that is unjust, let him be unjust still; and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still.” No longer will the precious cleansing blood be applied. These are they who shall wring out and drink the dregs of the cup that is in the hand of the Lord ([Psalm 75:8](1965.30733)); these are they who “shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation.” [Revelation 14:10](1965.63122). SITI July 20, 1888, p. 441.20
THIS cleansing of the heavenly sanctuary began in A.D. 1844, and in the very nature of the case must soon close. We are now living in the great day of atonement. Now is the time when it is urgent upon every soul to confess his sins, to put away all his transgressions, to be partaker of the intercession of Christ, to wash his robes and make them white in the blood of the Lamb. For soon the mystery of God will be finished, the work of the gospel will be closed, and the unmixed wrath of God and the Lamb will be poured upon all the wicked of the earth. SITI July 20, 1888, p. 441.21]

[“And the temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen in his temple the ark of his testament.” [Revelation 11:19](1965.63029). Did John see the ark of the ten commandments in heaven? Yes, so he testifies; and none who believe the Bible will doubt his testimony, and say that he some how fell into a mesmeric state, and saw things incorrectly. Then if the commandments are preserved in heaven, certainly they are not abolished on earth. PTJW April 1850, p. 69.2
In the type, the temple of God on earth, the place for the ark was in the “holiest of all,” within the second vail. In the antitype, “the temple of God” “in heaven,” the ark must be in the same place, for the earthly were _“patterns of things in the heavens_.” In the earthly, the “holiest of all” was opened at the end of the year, for the high priest alone to enter on the day that he cleansed the sanctuary; but the “holiest of all” of the heavenly “temple” was not opened until Jesus, our High Priest, entered to cleanse the sanctuary at the end of the 2300 days, in 1844. PTJW April 1850, p. 69.3]

[The Advent people scripturally sought, and earnestly plead, for the “bread” of life in 1843, and we are loth to believe that our heavenly Father gave us a “stone,” or that he gave us a “scorpion” in 1844. And we fail to see how it was possible for the Advent body to follow down the track of prophecy, without experiencing such a movement as that of the autumn of 1844. The vision that had seemed to tarry then spake. Let others call it _“a lie_.” But we fully believe that then was experienced the fulfillment of the words of the Prophet “at the end [of the 2300 days] it shall speak, and NOT LIE.” True we were disappointed as to the event to take place, but that is no evidence that the movement was not in the order of the Lord, and a fulfillment of Prophecy. Those that “cast their garments in the way,” and cried “Hosanna to the Son of David,” as Jesus rode into Jerusalem, entirely mistook the object of the first Advent, yet that display was all necessary to fulfill [Zechariah 9:9](1965.46977). The Pharisees said, “Master, rebuke thy disciples.” Jesus answered, “I tell you, that if these should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry out.” If such an exhibition should take place at this day, a thousand voices would be raised pronouncing it _“Mesmerism_.” Our “mistake,” as it is called, at the seventh month, was of the same nature as that of the disciples. They had an opportunity of learning the object of the first Advent. Adventists have a chance to learn the events that in order precede the Second Advent. No doubt but many who joined in the general shout of “Hosanna to the Son of David,” were afterwards ashamed of it, and perhaps made their _“confession_” to the Pharisees. Adventists should not be ashamed of the very experience that called them from the world and churches, and has made them Adventists. Consistency requires them to own their experience, or give up the Advent name. ARSH July 9, 1851, p. 99.5]

[Here let it be clearly understood that the services connected with the two atonements of the law, were an _“example_ and _shadow_ of _heavenly things_,” that is, the heavenly things, or priesthood of Jesus Christ, the substance or body, cast its shadow back into the Jewish age. And to make it still more sure that the services of the earthly Sanctuary, the _“shadow_,” were framed from the then future services of the heavenly Sanctuary, the _“good things to come_,” the Apostle adds, that when Moses was about to make the tabernacle, he was charged to “make ALL THINGS according to the pattern shewed” to him “in the mount.” Says Paul, “The law having a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of the things.” It was not possible that the services of the earthly Sanctuary should be the “very image” of those of the heavenly, but as nearly so as a shadow corresponds to the substance. There is this difference. The priests officiated in the daily ministration in the Holy, for 365 days, then a change took place in the services of the worldly Sanctuary. The high priest entered the Most Holy, on the tenth day of the seventh month, and on that day made an atonement for the cleansing of the Sanctuary. This change was yearly. But no such change was to take place in the services of the heavenly Sanctuary until the end of 2300 prophetic days. “Unto 2300 days, then shall the Sanctuary be cleansed,” said the angel to Daniel. The slaying of beasts in the law was repeated daily and yearly; but Christ was slain but once. The daily atonement was continued only 364 days before the services of the earthly Sanctuary changed, and the tenth day atonement for the cleansing of the Sanctuary was introduced. But in the priesthood of Jesus Christ, his continual intercessions in the Holy Place of the heavenly Sanctuary, were to continue more than 1800 years, down to the end of the 2300 days, [years,] which was the autumn of 1844, when a change was to take place in his mediation. He could no longer be a “Minister” in the Holy Place for all the world, as he had been for more than 1800 years, for the time had come for the heavenly Sanctuary to be cleansed. Jesus, therefore, on the tenth day of the seventh month 1844, at the end of the 2300 days, having closed his mediation for all the world, must pass into the Most Holy Place, within the second vail, or into that apartment of the “Temple of God in heaven” called the _“tabernacle of the testimony_.” “_Testimony_” here means the ten commandments, which in the typical Sanctuary were placed in the “Holiest of all.” This change in the position of our Great High Priest is illustrated by, and may well be _“likened_” to the coming of the bridegroom in the parable of the ten virgins. The priesthood of Christ is _“unchangeable_” in this respect, it does not pass from him to another as did the Levitical priesthood; but that a change was to take place in his position and ministration, at the end of the 2300 days, is clear. ARSH July 9, 1851, p. 101.12]

- 