- End of the 666 years that Pagan Rome occupied a universal throne: (see the bottom of MWV2 94.1^[About the time that Attila ravaged the Roman empire, Christians conceived it to be a judgment of God upon the Romans for their idolatry and wickedness, refused to bear arms in favor of the Roman emperors, which led to a bloody persecution of Christians, and a renewal of Pagan rites and sacrifices, which had been partially suspended during the reign of Constantine and succeeding emperors, except in the case of Julian the Apostate. “And arms shall stand on his part,” that is, the force of the empire would be on the side of Paganism. “And they shall pollute the sanctuary of strength.” _They_, in this passage, mean the governments or kings, established on the fall of the Roman empire in the west, by the Huns, Goths and Vandals of the north. “By sanctuary of strength,” is meant Rome. And it is said that at the time that Rome was taken, men, women, and children were sacrificed to their Pagan deities. “And shall take away the daily sacrifice.” The angel is giving us a history of what these kings would do, when Rome should be divided into its ten toes, or when the ten horns should arise, which the angel has heretofore explained to mean ten kings, [Daniel 7:24](1965.44801). This is evident by his using the plural pronoun instead of the singular, as before, or as he will following, when the little horn obtains the power. To “take away the daily sacrifice,” means to destroy Paganism out of the kingdom. This was done by those ten kings who now ruled the Roman empire, and would for a little season, until they should give their power to the image beast. “And they shall place the abomination that maketh desolate. _They_, meaning the ten kings,_shall place_, shall put in the room or _place_of the _daily sacrifice_ or Pagan beast which would now receive its death wound by the sword, that is, by the civil power of this fourth kingdom, under the reigning power of these ten kings; for John tells us, [Revelation 17:12, 13](1965.63227), “And the ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings, which have received no kingdom as yet; but _shall_ receive power as kings one hour with the beast; these have one mind, (being all Pagans,) and shall give their power and strength unto the beast;” that is, to support Paganism. Now, this was evidently fulfilled; for after the fall of the Western Empire, A. D. 476, and before A. D. 490, ten kings had risen upon the ruins, and formed ten separate kingdoms, and names of which I have before given; they all being Pagans, of course they supported that form of worship, until they were converted to the Christian faith, which happened within the space of twenty years, Clovis, the king of France, having been converted and baptized in the year A. D. 496. By the year A. D. 508, the remainder of the kings were brought over and embraced the Christian religion, which closes the history of the Pagan beast, whose number was 666; which, beginning 158 years B. C., would end the beast’s reign A. D. 508, having reigned but a short time, (_one hour_, says John,) with the ten kings. We have now gone through with the angel Gabriel’s second part of the history, as we promised. MWV2 94.1]).
	- In 508AD, the Ostrogoths (1 of the 10 nations to invade Rome) was converted to Christianity. With this, the majority of the nations (formerly Arian in faith and opposed to christianity) now stood on the side of christianity, and the pagan form of Rome ("the daily": referred to in [[Dan 8#11]]-13, [[Dan 11#31]], and [[Dan 12#11]], or "he who now letteth": referred to in [[2 Thess 2#7]]) " was taken out of the way".  See: APEC 93.3^[“_And have indignation against the holy covenant, and have intelligence with them that forsake the holy covenant_.” Julian, the apostate, exhibited his malice against the Christians, and did all he could to restore Paganism and put down Christianity. To effect this, he made use of apostates from the Christian faith, to betray the cause they had forsaken. The Pagans, also, in the empire, believed the distress they suffered from the Huns, etc., was in consequence of the wrath of their gods for suffering the Christians to live among them. “_Arms shall stand on his part_.” The Romans shall defend themselves by arms for a season, and preserve independent the eastern empire “_And they_ (the barbarous nations) _shall pollute the sanctuary of strength_,” (Rome,) by offering to their pagan deities human sacrifices. “_And shall take away the daily_ sacrifice,” “_and they shall place the abomination that_ _maketh desolate_.” The conquerors of Rome, when they were converted to Christianity, took away the pagan rites and sacrifices which had for centuries been observed in Rome, and in their place set up Christian images as objects of worship, which have continued in use to the present time. So that the removal of pagan abominations only made way for another great system of corruption and wickedness. This change was effected about A. D. 508, by the conversion of the Ostrogoths to the Christian faith, since which Christianity has been the religion of Rome. APEC 93.3], DAR 256.1^[As we approach the year A. D. 508, we behold a grand crisis ripening between Catholicism and the pagan influences still existing in the empire. Up to the time of the conversion of Clovis, king of France, A. D. 496, the French and other nations of Western Rome were pagan; but subsequently to that event, the efforts to convert idolaters to Romanism were crowned with great success. The conversion of Clovis is said to have been the occasion of bestowing upon the French monarch the titles of “Most Christian Majesty,” and “Eldest Son of the Church.” Between that time and A. D. 508, by alliances, capitulations, and conquests, the Arborici, the Roman garrisons in the West, Brittany, the Burgundians, and the Visigoths, were brought into subjection. DAR 255.3
	From the time when these successes were fully accomplished, namely, 508, the papacy was triumphant so far as paganism was concerned; for though the latter doubtless retarded the progress of the Catholic faith, yet it had not the power, if it had the disposition, to suppress the faith, and hinder the encroachments of the Roman pontiff. When the prominent powers of Europe gave up their attachment to paganism, it was only to perpetuate its abominations in another form; for Christianity, as exhibited in the Catholic Church, was, and is, only paganism baptized. DAR 256.1], and PSC 83.2-84.2^[_And they shall pollute the sanctuary of strength_. The sanctuary of strength was the city of Rome. _They_ refers to the kings of the Heruli and Rugii, who subdued and settled in Italy, A. D. 476. It is said, when Rome was taken by those barbarous kings, human sacrifices were offered in the city, to their supposed deities. Thus the sanctuary of strength, where Christianity had so long been planted, and where it was destined to be established as its common centre, even there the abominations of human sacrifices were offered up to pagan gods. Let it be kept in remembrance, that the ten kingdoms before named, which had settled in the western Roman empire, were all pagans. But the time has come for a change to take place. “They shall take away the daily sacrifice, and they shall place the abomination that maketh desolate.” The last of those kingdoms, that of the Lombards, was established A. D. 483. In A. D. 496, Clovis, king of France, being engaged in a war, made a vow to the God of Christians, that if he would render him victorious, he would become a Christian. Victory declared on the side of Clovis; and he and three thousand of his subjects were baptized into the Christian faith. The conversion of Clovis; gave rise to the titles, “_most Christian king_,” and “_eldest son of the church_.” Soon after this, the other kings finding it to be for their interest to gain the influence of the clergy, embraced the Christian faith and were baptized; the last of them in A. D. 508. PSC 83.2
	I must here refer the reader to the second chapter, for a full proof that “daily sacrifice,” means the daily sacrifices or abominations of paganism in the Roman empire. PSC 84.1
	We have now arrived to a period, and an event, when paganism in the empire received its deathblow, by the conversion of those pagan kings. Some vestiges of paganism did, of course, exist in the empire after this, but I know of no account of pagan sacrifices being offered, after that, in the city of Rome, “the place of his (paganism’s) sanctuary.” Nor did it ever recover much strength or influence any where in the bounds of the western Roman empire. Thus, in A. D. 508, paganism, or the daily _abomination_ of paganism ceased in the Roman empire. And it was taken away, too, by those pagan kings who conquered Rome. But the time had not yet fully come for the “man of sin” to be revealed. Those kings, although they had embraced Christianity, and gave their support to the pompous ceremonies of the Roman religion, yet they were most of them Arians in sentiment, and bitter opposers to the orthodox faith. They set up one of the abominations which have corrupted and made desolate the Christian Church, viz. the Arian heresy, the spring from whence arose open infidelity. Afterward they also lent their influence, as we shall hereafter see, to establish and support “the man of sin,” the papal hierarchy. But the ten horns of the Roman beast were not to continue long in their first or original state, but they were to “receive power as kings (St. John says) in one hour with the beast.” That is, the ten horns, or kingdoms, will be pagan, and their influence as kings, for a short time, will be in favor of the paganism of the great and dreadful beast of Daniel. Then after them was to rise another little horn, before whom three of the first horns should be plucked up by the roots. This little horn is the abomination that maketh desolate. These kings were, three of them, to be plucked up, to make way for the abomination which maketh desolate. What the three kingdoms were which were plucked up before the little horn, to make way for him, has been a matter of doubt. Mr. Faber’s opinion, however, looks the most rational of any, that the three horns must be sought for among the ten original kingdoms into which the empire was divided. One of them at least must be found in Italy, for that kingdom must be the seat of the little horn. The Heruli settled in Italy, A. D. 476. But they did not long enjoy their conquests, for in A. D. 493, Theodoric, king of the Ostrogoths, or Goths, as they are also called, leading his troops from Mesia, their original settlement, made a descent from the Julian Alps upon Italy, displayed his banner, conquered the Heruli, and was accepted as the deliverer of Rome, both by the senate and people. Here, then, we find one of the little horns plucked up by the roots, and it is not, nor has it ever again been restored. The Goths, however, stood in the place of the Heruli, to hinder the full establishment of popery. PSC 84.2] 
	- Fulfillment of:
		- [[2 Thess 2#7]]
		-  [[Dan 8#11]] 
		- [[Dan 11#31]]
		- [[Dan 12#11]]
- Beginning of the 1290 and 1335 year periods (spoken of in [[Dan 12#11]]-12). See: PREX2 128.2^[If it can now he shown when the last of the two events took place, viz., the abomination that maketh desolate was set up, we shall have the requisite date. The testimony has been produced from Gibbon, that the first outbreak of the Catholic church against the civil power of the empire on a question of faith-which outbreak resulted in a war, by which the emperor was subdued and yielded the point-was in A. D. 508. That conquest of the church was achieved, too, by an army of idolaters in behalf of popery. Then the abomination that maketh desolate was set up. From that point, 1290 years end in 1798, the time of the end; when the saints were taken out of the hands of popery. This fulfilment of the first period demonstrates the correctness of the starting point, as the fulfilment of the 70 weeks does the date of the 2300days. There is no uncertainty left on the point in the case of either date. PREX2 128.2]